---
hidden: true
---

# 4.2.2. Ethical hackers are trustworthy

Harper et al (2011) are an important authority on what constitutes ethical hacking. We do not have to agree with them wholeheartedly, but their conception of ethical hackers underscores the centrality of trust in ethical hacking practices. The title of their book, _Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook_, is a giveaway to their view, which is that white hat hackers are in fact grey hat hackers by necessity, by virtue of their practices. The ethics of ethical hacking includes the need to understand an adversary’s tactics and recognizing the grey areas in security, they argue.

Many times, while the ethical hacker is carrying out her procedures to gain total control of the network, she will pick up significant trophies along the way. These trophies can include the CEO’s passwords, company trade-secret documentation, administrative passwords to all border routers, documents marked “confidential” held on the CFO’s and CIO’s laptops, or the combination to the company vault. The reason these trophies are collected along the way is so the decision makers understand the ramifications of these vulnerabilities … as soon as you show the CFO his next year’s projections, or show the CIO all of the blueprints to the next year’s product line, or tell the CEO that his password is “IAmWearingPanties,” they will all want to learn more about the importance of a firewall and other countermeasures that should be put into place. (p. 11)

Andrasik (2016), and Thomas et al. (2018) make the same point as do Harper el al. (2011), that ethical hackers will sometimes unavoidably access privileged information. Andrasik (2016) adds that organizations hiring ethical hackers need to talk to references first:

If a pen-test group is going to actively try to breach your defenses, you want to know their ethics are beyond reproach. That knowledge should come from somewhere other than a well-crafted website or canned testimonials— it should come from conversations with companies that have experienced a pen test by the group in question.

Thomas et al. (2018) argue that naturally “and to be effective, ethical hacking involves trying to gain access to a system to access confidential and sensitive information. This means, that a certain level of trust needs to be established between the ethical hacker and the party engaging them” (p. 3). The authors point out a fact that admittedly complicates the discussion (it is an important point to note, but lies outside the thesis scope):

an ethical hacker needs to keep their knowledge of exploits up to date, and they will likely need to go “underground” to gain this knowledge (Conran 2014). Because ethical hackers may even utilize questionable means to gain intelligence it may result in a question of their professional ethics. (p. 4)

In contrast to a cracker, who is a malicious hacker, an ethical hacker “is someone who employs the same tools and techniques a criminal might use, with the customer’s full support and approval, to help secure a network or system” (Walker, 2017, p. 29).&#x20;

According to the International Council of Electronic Commerce Consultants (EC-Council), an ethical hacker is “an individual who is usually employed with the organization and who can be trusted to undertake an attempt to penetrate networks and/or computer systems using the same methods and techniques as a Hacker.” A Certified Ethical Hacker (EC-Council) is, “a skilled professional who understands and knows how to look for weaknesses and vulnerabilities in target systems and uses the **same knowledge and tools** as a malicious hacker, but in a lawful and legitimate manner to assess the security posture of the target system(s).”&#x20;

EC-Council emphasizes that ethical hackers use the same knowledge and tools as a malicious hacker but in a lawful and legitimate manner, and that ethical hackers are trustworthy professionals who are employed within business and industry organizations to perform security testing processes.&#x20;

Graves (2010) and Palmer (2001) agree on the three attributes of trust, honouring the integrity of the client’s system, and on seeking prior permission from the client. Graves refers to these traits as professional. First and foremost, ethical hackers “must be completely trustworthy” (Palmer, 2001, p. 771). During an evaluation, “the ethical hacker often holds the ‘keys to the company,’ and therefore must be trusted to exercise tight control over any information about a target that could be misused” (p. 771). Second, ethical hackers should take “all precautions to do no harm to their systems during a pen test” (para. 1). Third, the imperative to obtain permission before attempting to access the computer network--the practices of professional ethical hackers are governed by a legal framework (Graves, 2010; Palmer, 2001).&#x20;

Ethical hackers should address both systemic vulnerabilities as well as preventive measures (Harris, 2007; Palmer, 2001).&#x20;

Several codes of conduct for information security professionals and ethical hackers exit. They are all voluntary and only applicable to individuals who are members or certified professionals of the respective association. The codes of ethics may contain similar directives but they are all different and include different levels of detail.

Key Codes of Conduct for Information Security Professionals (Adapted from Thomas et al., 2018, pp. 5-6)

<table data-header-hidden><thead><tr><th valign="top"></th><th valign="top"></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td valign="top">Code of conduct </td><td valign="top">Key directives </td></tr><tr><td valign="top"><p>CREST Code of Conduct</p><p><br></p></td><td valign="top"><p>CREST is a not for profit organization that originated in the UK. It has active chapters across Europe, the Middle East, Africa and India (EMEA), the Americas, Asia, and Australia, and New Zealand. </p><p><br></p><p>CREST’s purpose is “to provide a level of assurance that organizations and their security staff have a level of competence and qualification in conducting security work such as penetration testing, threat intelligence or incident response (CREST, n.d.).”</p><p><br></p><p>The CREST code of conduct is “fairly detailed and covers requirements such as ensuring regulatory obligations, adequate project management, competency, client interests, confidentiality, and ethics (CREST, 2016).”</p></td></tr><tr><td valign="top"><p>EC-Council Code of Ethics</p><p><br></p></td><td valign="top"><p>EC-Council is best known for its Certified Ethical Hacker (CEH) certification, which is recognized as a U.S. Department of Defence (DoD) 8570 cybersecurity certification. </p><p><br></p><p>The EC-Council Code of Ethics requires “confidentiality of discovered information, ensuring that any process or software obtained is legal and ethical, ensuring proper authorization, adequate project management, continuing professional development, ethical conduct, and not being convicted of any crimes (EC-Council, n.d.).”</p></td></tr><tr><td valign="top"><p>Global Information Assurance Certification (GIAC) Code of Ethics</p><p><br></p></td><td valign="top"><p>GIAC provides several highly regarded certifications in the security industry which include penetration testing, security management, and digital forensic certifications. </p><p><br></p><p>The GIAC Code of Ethics is comprised of four sections: Respect for the public, respect for the certification, respect for the employer, and respect for oneself. </p><p><br></p><p>The code mandates that “professionals will take responsibility and act in the public’s best interests, ensure ethical and lawful conduct”; maintain confidentiality, competency, accurate representation of skills and certifications “and avoiding conflicts of interest (GIAC, n.d.).”</p></td></tr><tr><td valign="top"><p>ISACA Code of Professional Ethics</p><p><br></p></td><td valign="top"><p>ISACA was established in 1969 and focuses on IT governance. It has over 140,000 members worldwide (ISACA, n.d.).</p><p><br></p><p>ISACA provides training and certification for information security and cybersecurity professionals. The ISACA Code of Professional Ethics mandates that compliance with standards and procedures, due diligence, legal conduct and confidentiality, competency, and continuing professional development are maintained (ISACA, n.d). </p></td></tr><tr><td valign="top"><p>ISC2 Code of Ethics</p><p><br></p></td><td valign="top">ISC2 is an international, not for profit organization with over 125,000 members in the information security profession (ISC2, n.d.). ISC2’s Code of Ethics consists of four directives: Protecting society and public interest, acting honourably, honestly, justly, responsibly and legally, being competent, and advance to protect the profession (ISC2, n.d.).</td></tr></tbody></table>

Key Codes of Conduct for Information Security Professionals (Adapted from Thomas et al., 2018, pp. 5-6)&#x20;
