---
hidden: true
---

# 4.2.1. Professional ethical hacking is legal

The key defining characteristic of penetration testing as ethical hacking is the legal imperative: Ethical hacking is unambiguously legal. Ethical hackers need prior authorization, a legally binding contract with the computer network owners before attempting to breach a computer network (Bodhani, 2013; Palmer, 2001; Young, Lixuan, & Prybutok, 2007). Much of the discussion around the various hat color codes of hackers revolves around this point. While an ethical hacker is “authorised to break into supposedly ‘secure’ computer systems without malicious intent, but with the aim of discovering vulnerabilities in order to bring about improved protection,” a black-hat hacker is “someone who hacks with malicious intent and without authorisation” (Bodhani, 2013, p. 64). For Bodhani (2013), there is white, black, and a wide range of in-between ethical greys “who will search for vulnerable systems and inform the company but will hack without permission” (p. 65).

Bodhani (2013) presents 10 types of cyber hackers: White hats, black hats, grey hats, blue hats, elite hacker activist, script kiddies, spy hackers, cyber-terrorists and mobile hackers. But for Young et al. (2007), 9 of the 10 shades represent variations on the same theme: Illegal hacking. Computer hacking is either fully legal and authorized, or is an illegal activity. Presuming there is more than one type of acceptable hacking--authorized access--can give justification to illegal activity. Hackers often view themselves as modern-day Robin Hoods (Young et al., 2007). This Robin Hood mentality allows hackers “to deceive themselves and view their illegal activities as providing a service for the greater good. It also gives them cause to justify their activities should they be caught engaging in any illegal activities by blaming the victims” (p. 282).

The practices of professional ethical hackers are governed by a legal framework (Graves, 2010; Palmer, 2001). Ethical hackers have authorization to hack the target system. In recent years, hacking “is used most typically to describe a person who accesses computers and information stored on computers without first obtaining permission. Logan and Clarkson (2005) support that definition in describing hacking as accessing a system that one is either not authorized to access or one who accesses a system at a level beyond their authorization (Pashel, 2006). Hackers can be divided in to a number of groups some of which “are clearly ethical, others are clearly unethical, and still others exist in a gray area of sorts and whose ethics can be debated” (Pashel, 2006, p. 197). White hats use their ability “in a manner that most would clearly define as ethical. Examples are employees who, with permission, attack a company’s network in order to determine weaknesses, and law enforcement and intelligence agents who use their skill in the name of national security or to investigate and solve crimes.” They have a duty to use their knowledge in such a way as “to benefit other people” (Pashel, 2006, p. 197). Pike (2013) draws a sharp distinction between white and black hats. A white-hat hacker is defined as “a hacker who is committed to full compliance with legal and regulatory statutes as well as published ethical frameworks that apply to the task at hand.” In contrast, a black-hat hacker is “a hacker who either ignores or intentionally defies legal or regulatory statutes with presumably little interest in ethical frameworks” (p. 69). Logan and Clarkson (2005), Pashel (2006), Sharma and Sefchek (2007), Xu, Hu, and Zhang (2013), and Young et al. (2007) all more or less echo Pike’s definition--essentially placing hacking and hackers at either side of the law.

It should be noted, legal does not necessarily equate with ethical. What constitutes legal practice is a political verdict aimed at preserving (reflecting or embodying) the interests and values of those who drafted or ratified the rules. The use of technology to construct knowledge via open AI based intelligence gathering technologies by adversaries has much to do with the efficient and fair use of the technology in society, and in a global system, with the equitable access to the technologies, but is also subject to the pressures of realities (e.g., scarcity of resources) and human nature and its basic need for security above all else. For example, offensive realism in IR suggests that defensive measures taken by one nation are seen as threatening or as a threat by adversarial nations. Nation states seek regional and global hegemony as the only rational choice to ensure survival. Mearsheimer (2001) says conflict between nations is inevitable. In the Liberalism perspective to IR, nations should come together as responsible stakeholders and regulate the use of a technology in a collaborative manner that respects the values and interests of each.
