# Information security risk management

### Introduction to information security risk

In addition to the CIA triad, other fundamental information security concepts include:&#x20;

* A vulnerability is any potential weakness that can compromise the CIA of information assets. A window in a house is a vulnerability burglars can exploit to enter the house.&#x20;
* An exploit is something that can potentially be used to exploit the vulnerability. A rock can exploit the weakness of glass windows and may be used to enter a house.
* A threat is the potential of a vulnerability to be exploited. The threat of house burglary is the likelihood a burglar will exploit the glass window vulnerability using a rock (or other exploits) to gain entry into a house.&#x20;
* A mitigation technique is something that can protect against threats. Appropriate mitigation techniques should be implemented everywhere a vulnerability can be exploited, for example, client devices, servers, switches, and routers.

### Cybersecurity risk management concepts and practices

Pragmatically, organizations approach information security in terms of risk, threat, vulnerability, and mitigation. Organizations take a risk-based approach to information security management.

A standard definition of risk is the potential to lose something of value. Another definition involves the exposure to danger. In information security, risk is typically understood as threat times vulnerability times impact (the likelihood that a threat will exploit a vulnerability resulting in a business impact), or threat times vulnerability with an overlay of control effectiveness or velocity. The cybersecurity risk manager should determine what is the suitable definition. A key risk management challenge is prioritizing risk for optimal investment in countermeasures. A well-understood list of risks must be matched with a list of suitable mitigations for those risks. A risk can be accepted (evaluate if the cost of the countermeasure outweighs the possible cost of loss due to the threat), mitigated (implement safeguards and countermeasures to eliminate vulnerabilities or to block threats), or transferred (place the cost of the threat to another business function or unit) (Stewart, 2012).

A risk-based approach allows an organization to prioritize the vulnerabilities identified and focus its efforts on the risks that are the most significant to its operations. The first step in identifying business risks should be to understand the business as a society, as a social system–its identity, corporate vision, social/community relations, and values. Clause 4 of ISO 22301 calls for understanding internal and external environments, including an organization’s activities, functions, services, and the organization’s risk appetite (ISO 22301 Portal: Societal security – Business continuity management system, 2015). Businesses need to evaluate information security risks for the purposes of insurance underwriting and resource allocation; or if they are attempting to comply with HIPAA, PCI, and other regulations, they will perform a risk assessment periodically.&#x20;

Risk assessment “identifies risks generated by the possibility of threats acting on vulnerabilities, and what can be done to mitigate each one” (PCI DSS Risk Assessment Guidelines, 2005). Several major regulatory frameworks, including HIPAA, PCI, and SSAE 16, require businesses to perform periodic risk assessment.&#x20;

\<In order to simplify data governance, information **should be segregated by levels of importance and risk**, since it is very complicated to safeguard all the data in organization using the same standards … sensitive data has to be protected by more security measures in order to safeguard it. In some cases, in order to archive “defense in depth,” multiple security devices from different vendors are recommended.

A popular definition of risk management by ISO Guide 73:2009:

_In ideal risk management, a prioritization process is followed whereby the risks with the greatest loss (or impact) and the greatest probability of occurring are handled first, and risks with lower probability of occurrence and lower loss are handled in descending order. In practice the process of assessing overall risk can be difficult, and balancing resources used to mitigate between risks with a high probability of occurrence but lower loss versus a risk with high loss but lower probability of occurrence can often be mishandled._

**Acceptable risk**

After risk assessment, risks may be accepted, mitigated, or transferred (e.g., to another department or third party better equipped to manage them).

Systems can be more secure or less secure, but there is no absolute security. For example, you can implement malware detection on your network firewall and have the best antivirus software on client PCs, but the chance of the PCs getting infected with malware is never zero.&#x20;

**Security vs functionality**

Data that is not accessible to anyone may be perfectly secure, but it’s worthless to the enterprise if it cannot be seen and used.

### References

Reference
